README.md, before:

# Billionaire Analysis

---

**File Sources:**

- Jupyter Notebook: [cleaning_data.ipynb](cleaning_data.ipynb)
- CSV: [forbes_2022_billionaires.csv](Resources/forbes_2022_billionaires.csv)
- Cleaned CSV: [cleaned_billionaire.csv](Resources/cleaned_billionaire.csv)

**Technologies Used:**

- Python: Coding language. Packages include: Pathlib, Pandas, Matplotlib (including PyPlot), Plotly, Scikitlearn (including LabelEncoder, StandardScaler, train_test_split, LogisticRegression, RandomForestClassifier, confusion_matrix, accuracy_score, classification_report), Numpy, and SQLAlchemy
- SQL: Database host
- Tableau: Visualization creation
- HTML: Dashboard creation using Javascript/ CSS for customization
- Jupyter Notebook: Code production and testing purposes
- Quick Database Diagrams: To draft the entity relationship diagram

---

## Topic Introduction:

We will be analyzing trends seen in the billionaire community throughout this project. Specifically, we are looking to predict the net worth of a specific billionaire subject dependent on input variables including age, source of wealth and country. We plan to inspect two data frames from different periods in time (2018 and 2022) to understand changes over time as seen in subjects who hold billionaire status.

## Purpose:

We chose this topic as all team members had an interest in analyzing data relevant to finance. When compared to other financial topics, such as car price prediction and stock price prediction, the billionaire data sparked more interest as it represents a way to inspect economies over time and over world locations.

Analyzing the demographic information of billionaires can provide insight into the thriving industries, the accumulation of wealth, and the prevalent traits of billionaires such as age, gender, and location. Examining the yearly changes in billionaire data can give us a comprehensive understanding of growth patterns in emerging sectors.

Our team will be interested to compare the number of billionaires in each industry, examine the gender ratio, and discover other demographic trends that present themselves between the data from 2018 and 2022.

## Analysis Overview:

The purpose of this analysis was to clean the raw csv file containing information on Forbes Billionaires of 2022. The future use case of the cleaned billionaire csv file will be used for machine learning to better understand the relationships between key features and billionaires around the globe.

## Selected Topic: "The Forbes World’s Billionaires list"

Forbes is an American based business magazine and media company that produces articles that shed light on finance, industry, investing, and marketing related topics. The Forbes website reaches more than 27 million unique visitors each month. One of the main attractions to the website is the Forbes World’s Billionaires list.  The Forbes Billionaire list is an actively managed snapshot of individual and family wealth in today's global economy. Currently, there are, “2,668 billionaires on Forbes’ 36th-annual ranking of the planet’s richest people—87 fewer than a year ago. They’re worth a collective $12.7 trillion—$400 billion less than in 2021.” One of the primary methods that Forbes uses to track net worth is through stock prices and exchange rates. Due to the volatility of the market billionaires can be made or lost through day to day trading and general market price fluctuations. Some billionaires on the list do provide their private financial statements to Forbes, but in general Forbes has to predict and discount the variety of assets that are private companies, real estate, and art.

## Data Insights:

- This project includes two separate sets of data: one captures data on billionaires in 2018, and the second dataset is of billionaires from 2022.

- Both datasets are from Forbes.com. Forbes is a global media company that is focused on covering subjects regarding business, investing, technology, entrepreneurship, and lifestyle.

- The original Forbes Billionaire datasets had 23 separate columns ranging from each billionaire’s biography, their net worth, to the number of siblings they have.

- Based on the timeframe of this project, it was determined to build a supervised learning model; therefore, the data was encoded to numerical values in order for the machine learning model to produce a numerical outcome.

- Also based on the scope and goal of the project the data was cleaned and reduced to 7 specific columns.

- It was determined that the necessary columns included net worth, age, category, country, gender, and overall wealth rank.

- Each billionaire's name became the project's primary unique value.

- Machine learning algorithms typically only work with numerical data; therefore, things like the billionaire's country, the sector they made their wealth, and their gender were encoded to numerical values.

- Overall the data was cleaned and prepared in a way so the machine learning model could produce an outcome that can accuratley predict if an net worth is greater than a specified value.

## Data Columns Explained:

<img width="494" alt="data columns " src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/112028534/218921791-344dd98a-6fb7-45ae-8f4c-3583992e5a8f.png">

- The first column is the person’s name which acts as the unique identifier and primary key. 

- The age column represents how old each billionaire is.

- The net worth of each billionaire is found in the billionaire final worth column.

- The industry that the billionaire derives the majority of their wealth from is captured in the category column.

- The country column illustrates each billionaire’s current citizenship.

- The gender columns split the billionaires into male or female categories.


## Questions To Answer:

We are interested in discovering who 2022 billionaires are. Since there was such a large shift in the total wealth owned by billionaires (loss of $400 billion compared to 2021 billionaires), there are several insights that can be uncovered when examining trends in billionaire demographics. 

We will examine the following questions for the 2022 data...

- Will a model be able to predict if a billionaire's final worth is greater than $4.799 billion (the mean net worth value on the list) based off feature input values?
- Do the average ages of billionaires vary across different countries?
- Which industries produced billionaires in specific age groups and demographics?
- Which countries are home to billionaires? Also, how many billionaires live in each country?

When comparing 2018 to 2022 data...

- How has the distribution of industries that billionaires operate in changed from 2018 to 2022?
- What has been the shift in the distribution of billionaires' net worths from 2018 to 2022?
- What has been the change in the number of billionaires per country from 2018 to 2022?
- What is the comparison of male to female billionaires from 2018 to 2022?
- What has been the shift in the age groups of billionaires from 2018 to 2022?

---

## Results:

#### Cleaning Data

- Using Jupyter Notebook and Pandas to clean the data, the file was first imported using the pathlib function and put into a dataframe using pandas.

- In order to not over complicate and overfit our future machine learning process, certain columns that do not add value are dropped from the original dataframe.

- All of the data types are checked to ensure they are correct, which they are.

- The columns are counted and null values are checked to ensure all rows are filled. Any null values are dropped from the set and duplicate values are non-existent.

- The end result is the following image of the new and improved data set for further analysis.

![cleaned_df.png](Images/cleaned_df.png)

#### Exploratory Data Analysis

- Using Jupyter Notebook and Pandas the cleaned dataset for 2022 was filtered down to see the relationship between the number of billionaires and gender specifics. Below shows a pie chart highlighting the gender split between Male and Female. Male made up 88.8% of billionaires while Female only made up 11.2%.

![2022_Category_vs_Billionaires.png](Images/2022_Gender_Pie.png)

- To determine how age effects a billionaires final net worth, the following scatter plot was created. From this simple analysis, we can see that there isn't a huge correlation or relationship, so far between age and a billionaires final net worth.

![2022_Age_vs_FinalWorth.png](Images/2022_Age_vs_FinalWorth.png)

- Taking a close look at the Industry Category and the number of billionaires we can see from the horizontal bar chart below which industries rank the highest. **#1 Finance & Investments, #2 Technology, and #3 Manufacturing**.

![2022_Category_vs_Billionaires](Images/2022_Category_vs_Billionaires.png)

#### Machine Learning Model

Applying a supervised machine learning model to the dataset can reveal if hidden trends in the data can lead to accurate predictions. In this model, we will predict whether or not a billionaire has a final worth greater than the 2022 mean final worth value of $4.799 billion.

- Machine learning model: [machine_learning_model.ipynb](/machine_learning_model.ipynb)

<sub>Note: In this file the code is read in through the associated csv files. Code to connect to a SQL database is provided in the second cell.</sub>

We completed 6 model instances with the following parameters:

#### Section 1: 
The cleaned data was read into a dataframe for the 2022 Forbes List. A column was added to the dataframe that captured billionaires with final worth > $4.799 billion. If their final worth was greater than $4.799 billion, a 1 is generated into the column and a 0 if their final worth is less than $4.799 billion.
Target features are "rank", "age", "category", "country", "gender_F", and "gender_M" with the target column "finalWorth>4799".
Training and testing the model under logistic regression, the model was able to produce results of 99.22% accuracy.
![Section 1 confusion matrix](Images/section1_cm.png)

#### Section 2:
This model takes the cleaned merge data from 2018 and 2022 and ran through another logistical regression model. Using the same framework as section 1, a new column was generated to identify billionaires with a networth over $4.799 billion.
While this model generated a slightly low accuracy, the model is still very accurate with a result of 96.18%.
![Section 2 confusion matrix](Images/section2_cm.png)

#### Section 3: 
After further analysis of section 1 and 2 models, we wanted to see how much weight the "rank" column had on the machine learning model. The "rank" column was removed and the 2022 data from section 1 was ran through the logistical regression model to see how the results differ from the section 1 results. 
The accuracy of the model was significally impacted by the "rank" column resulting in a lower accuracy score of 77.52% versus with the "rank" column 99.22%.
![Section 3 confusion matrix](Images/section3_cm.png)

#### Section 4:
We then tested the 2018 and 2022 merged data with the revised feature list to see if the accuracy remains level with the model in section 3. 
After running through the logistical regression model, the accuracy score came to be slightly less at 76.78% 
![Section 4 confusion matrix](Images/section4_cm.png)

#### Section 5:
After viewing the success of the LogisticRegression model, we decided to use the RandomForestClassifier ensemble model to rank the importance of the features. This will give us a full list of the features as well as scores to measure how critical they are in calculating whether a billionaire's final worth is greater than $4.799 billion. 
After applying this model to the 2022 dataset, the accuracy score came to be slightly less at 73.45%. The feature importances were ranked in this order: "age" (0.5129), "country" (0.2561), "category" (0.2145), "gender_F" (0.0084), "gender_M" (0.0079). This suggests age is significantly more important to predicting final worth than the other features.* 
![Section 5 confusion matrix](Images/section5_cm.png)

#### Section 6:
We applied the RandomForestClassifier ensemble model to the 2018 and 2022 merged data to see if the feature importance rankings would hold steady with additional data. 
The accuracy of this model came to be slightly higher than the model in section 5, but still below the accuracy score of section 4: 74.44%. The feature importances were ranked in this order: "age" (0.4468), "country" (0.3025), "category" (0.2390), "gender_M" (0.0061), "gender_F" (0.0055). This suggests age is significantly more important to predicting final worth than the other features. Also to note, the "gender_M" and "gender_F" features were flipped in this model. This can be supported by the fact that there were more females on the 2022 Forbes Billionaires List than on the 2018 list. We can also observe that "country" and "category" have more distance between them in the 2018 and 2022 merged data, suggesting "country" may have experienced some changes that occurred between the 2018 and 2022 lists.* 
![Section 6 confusion matrix](Images/section6_cm.png)

<sub> * A note about features: "The feature importance scores returned by a random forest classifier are typically normalized so that they add up to 1.0, with higher scores indicating more important features. The values are not necessarily proportional to the percentage of the overall prediction that each feature contributes, and they are not bounded by 0 and 100.
In general, it’s more important to focus on the relative importance of each feature, rather than the absolute magnitude of the scores. For example, if a feature has an importance score of 0.2 and another feature has a score of 0.1, it means that the first feature is twice as important as the second feature in the prediction task." </sub>

---

## Summary:

After cleaning the data set we can now see that our number of billionaires for 2022 are filtered down to 2,576 people with 8 important features. All of the information is relative to future analysis in understanding the relationships between these individuals around the world.

Commit message:

Update readme with confusion matrix info

README.md, after:

# Billionaire Analysis

---

**File Sources:**

- Jupyter Notebook: [cleaning_data.ipynb](cleaning_data.ipynb)
- CSV: [forbes_2022_billionaires.csv](Resources/forbes_2022_billionaires.csv)
- Cleaned CSV: [cleaned_billionaire.csv](Resources/cleaned_billionaire.csv)

**Technologies Used:**

- Python: Coding language. Packages include: Pathlib, Pandas, Matplotlib (including PyPlot), Plotly, Scikitlearn (including LabelEncoder, StandardScaler, train_test_split, LogisticRegression, RandomForestClassifier, confusion_matrix, accuracy_score, classification_report), Numpy, and SQLAlchemy
- SQL: Database host
- Tableau: Visualization creation
- HTML: Dashboard creation using Javascript/ CSS for customization
- Jupyter Notebook: Code production and testing purposes
- Quick Database Diagrams: To draft the entity relationship diagram

---

## Topic Introduction:

We will be analyzing trends seen in the billionaire community throughout this project. Specifically, we are looking to predict the net worth of a specific billionaire subject dependent on input variables including age, source of wealth and country. We plan to inspect two data frames from different periods in time (2018 and 2022) to understand changes over time as seen in subjects who hold billionaire status.

## Purpose:

We chose this topic as all team members had an interest in analyzing data relevant to finance. When compared to other financial topics, such as car price prediction and stock price prediction, the billionaire data sparked more interest as it represents a way to inspect economies over time and over world locations.

Analyzing the demographic information of billionaires can provide insight into the thriving industries, the accumulation of wealth, and the prevalent traits of billionaires such as age, gender, and location. Examining the yearly changes in billionaire data can give us a comprehensive understanding of growth patterns in emerging sectors.

Our team will be interested to compare the number of billionaires in each industry, examine the gender ratio, and discover other demographic trends that present themselves between the data from 2018 and 2022.

## Analysis Overview:

The purpose of this analysis was to clean the raw csv file containing information on Forbes Billionaires of 2022. The future use case of the cleaned billionaire csv file will be used for machine learning to better understand the relationships between key features and billionaires around the globe.

## Selected Topic: "The Forbes World’s Billionaires list"

Forbes is an American based business magazine and media company that produces articles that shed light on finance, industry, investing, and marketing related topics. The Forbes website reaches more than 27 million unique visitors each month. One of the main attractions to the website is the Forbes World’s Billionaires list.  The Forbes Billionaire list is an actively managed snapshot of individual and family wealth in today's global economy. Currently, there are, “2,668 billionaires on Forbes’ 36th-annual ranking of the planet’s richest people—87 fewer than a year ago. They’re worth a collective $12.7 trillion—$400 billion less than in 2021.” One of the primary methods that Forbes uses to track net worth is through stock prices and exchange rates. Due to the volatility of the market billionaires can be made or lost through day to day trading and general market price fluctuations. Some billionaires on the list do provide their private financial statements to Forbes, but in general Forbes has to predict and discount the variety of assets that are private companies, real estate, and art.

## Data Insights:

- This project includes two separate sets of data: one captures data on billionaires in 2018, and the second dataset is of billionaires from 2022.

- Both datasets are from Forbes.com. Forbes is a global media company that is focused on covering subjects regarding business, investing, technology, entrepreneurship, and lifestyle.

- The original Forbes Billionaire datasets had 23 separate columns ranging from each billionaire’s biography, their net worth, to the number of siblings they have.

- Based on the timeframe of this project, it was determined to build a supervised learning model; therefore, the data was encoded to numerical values in order for the machine learning model to produce a numerical outcome.

- Also based on the scope and goal of the project the data was cleaned and reduced to 7 specific columns.

- It was determined that the necessary columns included net worth, age, category, country, gender, and overall wealth rank.

- Each billionaire's name became the project's primary unique value.

- Machine learning algorithms typically only work with numerical data; therefore, things like the billionaire's country, the sector they made their wealth, and their gender were encoded to numerical values.

- Overall the data was cleaned and prepared in a way so the machine learning model could produce an outcome that can accuratley predict if an net worth is greater than a specified value.

## Data Columns Explained:

<img width="494" alt="data columns " src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/112028534/218921791-344dd98a-6fb7-45ae-8f4c-3583992e5a8f.png">

- The first column is the person’s name which acts as the unique identifier and primary key. 

- The age column represents how old each billionaire is.

- The net worth of each billionaire is found in the billionaire final worth column.

- The industry that the billionaire derives the majority of their wealth from is captured in the category column.

- The country column illustrates each billionaire’s current citizenship.

- The gender columns split the billionaires into male or female categories.


## Questions To Answer:

We are interested in discovering who 2022 billionaires are. Since there was such a large shift in the total wealth owned by billionaires (loss of $400 billion compared to 2021 billionaires), there are several insights that can be uncovered when examining trends in billionaire demographics. 

We will examine the following questions for the 2022 data...

- Will a model be able to predict if a billionaire's final worth is greater than $4.799 billion (the mean net worth value on the list) based off feature input values?
- Do the average ages of billionaires vary across different countries?
- Which industries produced billionaires in specific age groups and demographics?
- Which countries are home to billionaires? Also, how many billionaires live in each country?

When comparing 2018 to 2022 data...

- How has the distribution of industries that billionaires operate in changed from 2018 to 2022?
- What has been the shift in the distribution of billionaires' net worths from 2018 to 2022?
- What has been the change in the number of billionaires per country from 2018 to 2022?
- What is the comparison of male to female billionaires from 2018 to 2022?
- What has been the shift in the age groups of billionaires from 2018 to 2022?

---

## Results:

#### Cleaning Data

- Using Jupyter Notebook and Pandas to clean the data, the file was first imported using the pathlib function and put into a dataframe using pandas.

- In order to not over complicate and overfit our future machine learning process, certain columns that do not add value are dropped from the original dataframe.

- All of the data types are checked to ensure they are correct, which they are.

- The columns are counted and null values are checked to ensure all rows are filled. Any null values are dropped from the set and duplicate values are non-existent.

- The end result is the following image of the new and improved data set for further analysis.

![cleaned_df.png](Images/cleaned_df.png)

#### Exploratory Data Analysis

- Using Jupyter Notebook and Pandas the cleaned dataset for 2022 was filtered down to see the relationship between the number of billionaires and gender specifics. Below shows a pie chart highlighting the gender split between Male and Female. Male made up 88.8% of billionaires while Female only made up 11.2%.

![2022_Category_vs_Billionaires.png](Images/2022_Gender_Pie.png)

- To determine how age effects a billionaires final net worth, the following scatter plot was created. From this simple analysis, we can see that there isn't a huge correlation or relationship, so far between age and a billionaires final net worth.

![2022_Age_vs_FinalWorth.png](Images/2022_Age_vs_FinalWorth.png)

- Taking a close look at the Industry Category and the number of billionaires we can see from the horizontal bar chart below which industries rank the highest. **#1 Finance & Investments, #2 Technology, and #3 Manufacturing**.

![2022_Category_vs_Billionaires](Images/2022_Category_vs_Billionaires.png)

---

#### Machine Learning Model

Applying a supervised machine learning model to the dataset can reveal if hidden trends in the data can lead to accurate predictions. In this model, we will predict whether or not a billionaire has a final worth greater than the 2022 mean final worth value of $4.799 billion.

- Machine learning model: [machine_learning_model.ipynb](/machine_learning_model.ipynb)

<sub>Note: In this file the code is read in through the associated csv files. Code to connect to a SQL database is provided in the second cell.</sub>

We completed 6 model instances with the following parameters:

#### Section 1: 
The cleaned data was read into a dataframe for the 2022 Forbes List. A column was added to the dataframe that captured billionaires with final worth > $4.799 billion. If their final worth was greater than $4.799 billion, a 1 is generated into the column and a 0 if their final worth is less than $4.799 billion.

Target features are "rank", "age", "category", "country", "gender_F", and "gender_M" with the target column "finalWorth>4799".
Training and testing the model under logistic regression, the model was able to produce results of 99.22% accuracy.

The confusion matrix presents the prediction values.

![Section 1 confusion matrix](Images/section1_cm.png)

#### Section 2:
This model takes the cleaned merge data from 2018 and 2022 and ran through another logistical regression model. Using the same framework as section 1, a new column was generated to identify billionaires with a networth over $4.799 billion.

While this model generated a slightly lower accuracy, the model is still very accurate with a result of 96.61%.

The confusion matrix presents the prediction values.

![Section 2 confusion matrix](Images/section2_cm.png)

#### Section 3: 
After further analysis of section 1 and 2 models, we wanted to see how much weight the "rank" column had on the machine learning model. The "rank" column was removed and the 2022 data from section 1 was ran through the logistical regression model to see how the results differ from the section 1 results. 

The accuracy of the model was significally impacted by the "rank" column resulting in a lower accuracy score of 76.94% versus with the "rank" column 99.22%.

The confusion matrix presents the prediction values. Note that there are 0 values in the true positive and false positive cells. This means no values were predicted to have final worth > $4.799 and turned out to actually have final worth < $4.799, and no values were predicted final worth < $4.799 and turned out to have final worth > $4.799. This could suggest over fitting, or the model aligning too closely with the limited data to be able to predict values outside of these datasets. If we were able to access more data, the overfitting problem could be corrected through extra training.

![Section 3 confusion matrix](Images/section3_cm.png)

#### Section 4:
We then tested the 2018 and 2022 merged data with the revised feature list to see if the accuracy remains level with the model in section 3. 

After running through the logistical regression model, the accuracy score came to be slightly more at 80.49% 

The confusion matrix presents the prediction values. Note that there are 0 values in the true positive and false positive cells. This means no values were predicted to have final worth > $4.799 and turned out to actually have final worth < $4.799, and no values were predicted final worth < $4.799 and turned out to have final worth > $4.799. This could suggest over fitting, or the model aligning too closely with the limited data to be able to predict values outside of these datasets. If we were able to access more data, the overfitting problem could be corrected through extra training.

![Section 4 confusion matrix](Images/section4_cm.png)

#### Section 5:
After viewing the success of the LogisticRegression model, we decided to use the RandomForestClassifier ensemble model to rank the importance of the features. This will give us a full list of the features as well as scores to measure how critical they are in calculating whether a billionaire's final worth is greater than $4.799 billion. 
After applying this model to the 2022 dataset, the accuracy score came to be slightly less at 76.94%. The feature importances were ranked in this order: "age" (0.5129), "country" (0.2561), "category" (0.2145), "gender_F" (0.0084), "gender_M" (0.0079). This suggests age is significantly more important to predicting final worth than the other features.* 

The confusion matrix presents the prediction values.

![Section 5 confusion matrix](Images/section5_cm.png)

#### Section 6:
We applied the RandomForestClassifier ensemble model to the 2018 and 2022 merged data to see if the feature importance rankings would hold steady with additional data. 

The accuracy of this model came to be slightly higher than the model in section 5, but still below the accuracy score of section 4: 74.44%. The feature importances were ranked in this order: "age" (0.4468), "country" (0.3025), "category" (0.2390), "gender_M" (0.0061), "gender_F" (0.0055). This suggests age is significantly more important to predicting final worth than the other features. Also to note, the "gender_M" and "gender_F" features were flipped in this model. This can be supported by the fact that there were more females on the 2022 Forbes Billionaires List than on the 2018 list. We can also observe that "country" and "category" have more distance between them in the 2018 and 2022 merged data, suggesting "country" may have experienced some changes that occurred between the 2018 and 2022 lists.* 

The confusion matrix presents the prediction values.

![Section 6 confusion matrix](Images/section6_cm.png)

<sub> * A note about features: "The feature importance scores returned by a random forest classifier are typically normalized so that they add up to 1.0, with higher scores indicating more important features. The values are not necessarily proportional to the percentage of the overall prediction that each feature contributes, and they are not bounded by 0 and 100.
In general, it’s more important to focus on the relative importance of each feature, rather than the absolute magnitude of the scores. For example, if a feature has an importance score of 0.2 and another feature has a score of 0.1, it means that the first feature is twice as important as the second feature in the prediction task." </sub>

---

## Summary:

After cleaning the data set we can now see that our number of billionaires for 2022 are filtered down to 2,576 people with 8 important features. All of the information is relative to future analysis in understanding the relationships between these individuals around the world.
